Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts. This
is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. With this show we're beginning a look at the
fascinating writing career of science fiction author Charles Harness. Born and
raised in Texas, Harness completed his university in law studies in Washington DC.
From 1946 to 1953, Harness produced 13 short stories and two novels. One of the
novels, The Rose, is a classic. Harness completed law school in 1946 so in those
years he was striving to establish a career as a patent lawyer and to support
his family right and it was the financial strain confronting his young family
that encouraged Harness to write science fiction. I was working in Washington as
a mineral economist during the war and going to law school and my daughter was
born in 1946 and there were some bills to be paid and we needed the money so i
sat down and wrote my first science fiction story which was "Time Trap". And this
was bought by what was then Astounding and I thought well gee do they pay money
for this stuff so I thought perhaps I should turn out some more of it which I
did. So Harness cut the writing bug and was able to work full-time and to write
for a few years but he did stop writing in 1953 and he wasn't heard from again
until 1966. Here's what he told us when we asked him about that long gap. I wrote
for a while until my daughter got old enough to demand more and more of my time
so the writing had to come to an end and it didn't really resume again until she
was ready to go off to college. This was in 1964 and I picked it up again. Two of
these early stories Harness published under the pseudonym Leonard Lockhart. The
second of the two, The Professional Look, was a joint effort between Harness and
Theodore Thomas, another patent lawyer. Here, Harness describes the genesis of
these stories and their eventual course. Ted and I we were in the patent
department at sign amid together. I wrote the first Leonard Lockhart story,
"Improbable Profession," and at that time he was writing science articles for the
Stanford Advocate as well as being on the patent in the patent department at
sign amid. So I said to him why don't you and I start this series of stories
about a patent attorney and his problems. Here's the first one. So he said yeah we
can do that, so I wrote the first one. He wrote the second one. No, together we
wrote the second one; it was half and half. And after that I left sign amid and
went to grace and he continued the series, so number three is in all subsequent
stories or his even though the name Leonard Lockhart is still used.
Harness's active writing periods were 1946 to 1953, during which he produced 13
short stories and the two novels, Flight Into Yesteryear also published as A Paradox
Man, and The Rose. 1966 and 1968, with six short stories and the novel The Ring of
Ritornel. And 1974 to the present, which saw publication of Wolfhead, The Catalyst,
Firebird, and The Venetian Court, along with three short stories many of Harness's
works feature mystical elements. Apparently this aspect of life has influenced
Harness a great deal. I did go to a ministerial school at TCU at one time. This is
long long ago and they threw me out for reasons I won't go into here but it was
a wise decision. But I've never lost a mystic plant to lots of things. On our next
show we'll begin to look at Harness's most famous work the rose
this has been the Science Fiction Radio Show a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. 1953 marked the publication of a little
-known science fiction classic, Charles Harness's short novel entitled The Rose.
And we have to say little-known because of the curious history of the book.
Right. First of all, Harness attempted to sell the book in the United States
markets, but the editors were unwilling to buy it. He then had to sell it in
England to a relatively obscure magazine, Authentic Science Fiction. My agent at
the time, Forrest Ackerman of, I think, Los Angeles, peddled it around here and
there. Nobody in this country would buy it. It went to John Campbell, and he wrote
a nice two-line letter bag. He just couldn't use it. It wasn't the kind of thing
that any science fiction magazine or fantasy and science fiction magazine was
publishing at the time. And I should have known better for writing it. But I
wanted to write it, so I did. And finally, Ackerman sold it to this little
Authentic magazine in England, and they published it. Authentic was under the
editorship of H.J. Campbell when The Rose was published. Publication of The Rose
is considered to be the capstone achievement in the generally mediocre 85-issue
run of the magazine. It would have languished in the pages of Authentic were it
not for the fact that the British critics absolutely loved it. Arthur Clarke,
Judith Merril, Brian Aldiss, and in particular Michael Moorcock praised it. It
was through the almost single-handed efforts of Moorcock that The Rose was
published in book form, again in England, some years later. Arthur Clarke saw
it, Dr. Moorcock saw it. And Moorcock was getting into the editor business over
there at that time.
Asked to have his people, Compact Books, publish it. And we have a contract for
that, and they did publish it. Then it was picked up fairly quickly by two other
British outfits in hardcover form. And of course they had to pad it out with the
two other stories to make it in a book size. The two short stories added to pad
the length of the volume in which The Rose was finally published are "The New
Reality" and "The Chess Players." "The New Reality," written in 1950 and first
published in Thrilling Wonder Stories, is considered to be Harness' finest short
story. "The Chess Players" is a clever little story based on the trouble it
develops when a chess club encounters a chess-playing rap. In fact, many of
Harness' works allude to chess. We ask him if he enjoys the game. Well, I loved
to play it, or at least in other years I did. And I still do. I read a book of
chess combinations nearly every night. It puts me to sleep. Various brilliances
of some of the past masters. It's an exciting thing. It wasn't until 1969 that
The Rose was made available in the United States, thanks to the efforts of Damon
Knight. Berkley published it then, and so far that has been the only American
edition. Damon Knight then picked it up from the British. He said, hey, here's
the thing I've been thinking about all these many years, and that's come out in
Britain. Why didn't you give it to me? So, okay. I sold Berkley the rights, the
U.S. rights to it. And that's why all the time lag. If it hadn't been for
Moorcock, it would never have gone anywhere. It struck us that one reason The
Rose could not find a United States publisher in 1953 was that American readers
simply were not ready for a book heavy on the metaphysical rather than the
hardware. We asked Harness if he might agree. You got a point there. They could
live with something like this, whereas over here everybody was guided pretty
much by the dean of science fiction, John Campbell, and he was a hardware man. And
everything had to obey the laws of physics or it would be unacceptable. More
about The Rose on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. On our last show, we talked with science
fiction author Charles Harness about his classic short novel, The Rose. We
learned how The Rose was enthusiastically embraced by the British critics. Yet
it wasn't published in the United States until 16 years had elapsed from its
initial publication in an obscure British magazine. In this show, we'll look at
some of the literary aspects of The Rose. Many of Harness's earlier works were
written hastily, but, we hasten to add, not clumsily. The Rose, on the other
hand, required a considerable length of time for completion. That was one of the
stories where I didn't know how it was going to come out. And in fact, I worked
on that one for two years, Bill. This is not a two-month job. I read all the
books on the arts in the Stanford Public Library. This is one year. I took notes
on them for my entire two weeks' vacation one year. And then it gradually began
to come together. And I used, of course, as you've seen in the story, Oscar
Wilde's story of The Nightingale and the Rose, which I'd read many years
before, and I was quite impressed by it. Harness also filled us in on some other
details about the writing of The Rose. For instance, its early incarnations were
longer, and it originally had another name. Let me give you a little bit more
history on this. There was a time when The Rose was in a longer form, and it had
the name, not The Rose, but Invitation. It was an intergalactic thing, where the
Earth was being examined to see whether it would be admitted into a galactic
brotherhood. And it didn't have the ending that it now has. Damon Knight liked
that, but he couldn't get his publishers to accept it. This, again, was a year
or so before it came out, and it's inauthentic in its short form, which it tells
nothing. So, at that point, I said, maybe I'm going to shorten this thing down,
give it a different ending. So, I did. I cut it from 45,000 words down to, I
think it's about 30,000.
And Ackerman then was able to sell it to the authentic in England. The central
theme of The Rose is difficult to capsule. It's a love story involving two
central characters, Ruy Jacques and Anna van Tuyl. It's set in the midst of a
future confrontation between science and art, and it describes a transcendental
evolution of man into Superman. Harness and his brother Billy, who, as we shall
learn in a later show, died when Harness was still in high school, were the
models for the central characters. Ruy Jacques, again, resembles my brother a
great deal.
And if you can visualize that guy with his sarcasm, his biting wit, his contempt
for all the, well, I don't know. But he was a, he had a high personal integrity
and a impatience with, with, uh, convention and so on. At least in his head, he
did. And I wanted to get him in the print. And, of course, Anna van Tuyl is me,
although I tried to take on a female form to make it effective. I would have, at
one time, I was, I would have been pleased to die if it would bring him back.
But it, of course, that was just being silly. But it was a thought, and it was a
psychic force driving the story. Do yourself a favor. Find a copy of The Rose in
your local used bookstore and read it.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. In 1968, Berkley published Charles Harness'
novel, The Ring of Ritornel, his first work to appear in 15 years. It's the
story of two brothers, one a lawyer, the other a poet, and a far distant future.
Here, Harness, who is himself a lawyer, tells us about the very personal
inspiration for the poet. My brother Billy was several years older than I. In
fact, he was nine years older than I. And he died when I was just about to
graduate from high school. He had tumors of the brain, which in those days were
inoperable. Today, it wouldn't be too much trouble to operate if they couldn't
do it then. So, I have remembered him. And I have never let him go. And he has
been in several of my stories. He was the Ring of Ritornel. He was the brother
who was destroyed by the chief bad guy. But his brain was retained. He was the
poet. His name was Omere. In 1977, Wolfhead, Harness's fourth novel, came out. It
was his first novel in nine years. Wolfhead describes a post-atomic holocaust
America and the struggle between various cultures that populate the desolate
land. Harness told us that when he wrote Wolfhead, he went against the
conventional wisdom that one shouldn't write about certain subjects. I started
out writing it. I thought I would do a thing which is frowned upon. You're not
supposed to write post-atomic novels. It's really unacceptable. But here seemed
to be a good one. A real-life character, Richard Nixon, inspired Harness's
characterization of the malevolent leader of the underworld. Well, I thought,
gee, here's this guy. He's about to take over the country. Anything he does is
okay just because he says so. And I'm going to have a character like that in
Wolfhead. So, I put him in there. He was the president of the underworld, and he
would come out and rule the upper world, except he didn't. Even the wolf with
the title was inspired by a real-life dog. The wolf was modeled at the time on
an Alaskan husky dog that lived next door to us. And she and I were great
friends, so I thought I'd put her in it. When Harness reminisced about Wolfhead,
he told us he was pretty much pleased by it. It's one of my happier efforts.
It's not really serious.
Well, some of it is. You know, at one time, it had a different ending. Of
course, we had to ask Harness about that different ending. Keep in mind that
during his writing career, he was a full-time patent attorney. The answer to
this question provides an interesting insight into other ways the real world can
intrude into fiction. And I have to cough when I think about it. Excuse me while
I cough. This is a psycholo...
That was a psychological cough.
In the original ending, the girl lived. But I got involved in some chemical
litigation that I lost. And I was so angry and so disappointed, I said, somebody
has to die. So I killed the heroine and wrote some poetry for her benefit so she
wouldn't feel too badly about it. And that's the poetry, of course, is in the
front and in the back. So that's a little sidelight on that. We'll have more
with Charles Harness on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Science fiction author Charles Harness
began writing in earnest again in the late 70s, and he produced three novels in
short order. The Catalyst is the story of a patent lawyer who works for a
chemical company. In this respect, it resembles some short stories Harness wrote
a decade earlier, "The Alchemist" and "An Ornament to His Profession". The Catalyst
actually started out as a longer, mainstream novel, but Harness, unable to sell
it, fixed it up as a science fiction work. His brother figured heavily in this
book, too. The Catalyst at one time was a general novel, really about my brother
Billy, really about me and my mother, and life in Fort Worth, and life in the
Red Light District, and life in the police department.
And one of the stories there involved a peculiar whistle, which was derived from
Sheep May Safely Graze by Johann Sebastian Bach. But that long version never
sold. And I thought, well, I'm not going to let it die. I will convert it to a
science fiction book. With all the proper trappings and things you need to call
it science fiction, which I did. In 1981, Harness published a novel that was
sort of a throwback to his early period galaxy-galloping days. Firebird is made
up of early Harness devices, such as a time loop and the rebirth of the cosmos.
Here Harness tells us about the basis for the story in Firebird. I'm sure you
recognize the basic story here. This is Tristan and Isolde. I don't know whether
you go in for Wagner or not, but it is Isolde and Tristan drinking what she
thinks is the poison drink, but it's the love of lecture again. And they fall in
love. And after that, just about everything parallels the Tristan and Isolde
story as you would find it in Wagner's opera, including Death at the Inn.
Editor David Hartwell of Pocketbooks also influenced Harness' approach to this
novel. In the beginning, when I first wrote David Hartwell of Pocketbooks, I
should mention, he is a medieval scholar. This is what he got his Ph.D. in
English in. And he was quite familiar with the Tristan legend, a myth. And he
found Welsh origins for it. And he had me change the names to look like Welsh
names. And he said, make him more of a Renaissance knight. So I put in some
chess, which is easy enough. So there was something that looked like a chess
game. I worked it into the plot and it came out okay. Predators are never
content unless they make their contribution.
Harness has retired from his lifelong profession of being a patent attorney.
He's recently produced a couple of short stories in a novel and more are in the
works. He's a gentleman who, while working full-time, produced a small body of
quality science fiction. We asked him how he wishes to be remembered. My request
there is, please forget me. Let me sink into oblivion. Let the waves wash up
over the sand. And everything disappear. Honest to God. We somehow doubt that
Mr. Harness will be forgotten.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.